[MUSIC]
Anova is used when we have
categorical explanatory variables so
that the observations belong to groups.
It's stand for, analysis of variance,
where we compare the variability of
responses within groups to the variability
of responses between groups.
If the variability between groups is
large, relative to the variability
within the groups, we conclude
that there is a grouping effect.
Categorical explanatory variables
are often referred to as factor variables.
Factors can have two categories or levels.
For example, low and
high or true and false.
Or they can have many levels.
They often result from experiments
where we carefully assign values of
explanatory variables.
Two randomly selected subjects, and
look for a cause and effect relationship.
There could be one, or
many factors in an experiment.
For example, if we are going to conduct
an online marketing experiment,
we might experiment with two
factors of website design.
Let's say these factors are sound.
And font size.
We might use two levels with sound.
For example, having music or
having no music.
And for the font size factor, we might do
something like small, medium, and large.
This two by three design would result in
a total of six treatment combinations.
For example, we could do a website with
music in small font, or no music in large.
There are six possible ways to do that.
Let's write down the model with one
explanatory variable that has g,
capital g levels.
That would be yi given
a variable that tells us
which group individual I belongs to.
All of the means for
each group and sigma squared would
be independently distributed
normal where the mean is mu,
the mu that corresponds to
the group of subject i.
And, of course, variance sigma squared.
This g variable right here is just
a group indicator, so it would be
a member of one of this set, one of these
numbers right here, from 1 up to g.
So for individual i of gi is 2,
that means that yi is a member of group 2.
And, of course,
we have our observations 1 up to n.
Alternatively, we can write the mean
in terms of an intercept representing
a baseline group and then affects for
each of the g minus 1 other groups.
So we could write an alternative model,
Alternative model formulation
would be to set the expected value,
right here, (yi) = beta0
+ beta1 X1i like we had before
up to betaG-1*XG-1i.
Here the X variables are what
are called dummy variables.
They're indicators that
the group of individual I,
in this case, is 1.
This X here would be an indicator
variable that the group
of individual i is G minus 1.
That is at most one of the Xs will
be turned on or have a value of 1.
Otherwise, if we're in group capital G,
the last group, the only
parameter active is this one here, so beta
naught corresponds to the mean of group g.
Again, these Xs here are what
are called dummy variables,
they indicate the membership of
the observation into group k.
This formulation right here shows how
Anova is related to linear regression.
This formulation is also the default in r.
These two formulations for
the mean are equivalent and
both of them have capital G parameters for
the mean.
If we have more than capital G parameters,
the parameters would no
longer be uniquely identified
since infinite combinations of parameter
values would result in the same mean.
We must be careful not
to overparameterize.
Again, the assumption of constant
variance across all groups might be
too restrictive for your data.
If that's the case, you might also
consider having multiple sigma squared
parameters for different groups.
We're now going to consider
the model where we have two factors.
Let's call the factors A and B.
They might correspond to sound being A,
and font size being B,
from our website design experiment
that we discussed earlier.
One option for a model is that now against
to the first model we used for one factor.
Where we have a different mean for
each stream and combination.
This is called the cell means model.
So if we have factor A which in this case
will be sound we have two levels, and
for factor B which could be represented
by font size would have three levels.
So this might be representing small,
medium, and large.
In this model formulation,
we need a different mean for
each one of these combinations,
so Mu 1 sub 1 would
represent the mean for
this group with music and small font size.
We can fill in the rest of these.
So each of these means
corresponds to a treatment group.
It is written, the model itself
is written, the same as before,
except that Mu now has two indexes,
one for each factor.
With six treatment groups, we can have at
most six parameters describing the means.
However, we might get away
with fewer parameters.
For example,
we can use the following additive model.
This model,
which has only 4 parameter instead of 6,
would be appropriate if we believe
there are no interactions.
Let's write this model out really quick.
The expected value for
yi would be equal to a baseline,
mean plus we'll say,
alpha-2 times the indicator.
That the level of factor A,
which we'll call little a for
individual I, is 2.
In other words, this is an indicator that
individual I is in level 2 of factor A.
Then we could have a beta
2 times an indicator.
That the level for individual
I of factor B is equal to 2 plus
beta 3 times an indicator that BI = 3.
This Mu here represents the mean for
this group right here.
And then, if they are in different group,
for example, a factor A, we would
add alpha-2 which represents the effect
of going from this group to this group.
Same thing goes for factor B.
If we want to move from level
one of factor B up to level 2,
we would add this coefficient here.
It's an adjustment to the mean.
I mentioned earlier that this additive
model would be appropriate if we had no
interaction between the variables.
Or in other words, if we believe that
going from level 1 to level 2 of factor A,
has the same effect on the mean
regardless of whether we're in level 1,
2, or 3 of factor B.
If the effect of factor A on the response
changes between levels of factor B.
Then we would need more parameters
to describe how that mean changes.
For example, with this cell means model.
This phenomenon is called
interaction between the factors.
In the coming segments we will look at
an example of a one way Anova model.
We'll work with the two-way
Anova in the honors section.
[MUSIC]